# Simulating User Segments and Campaigns [](id=simulating-user-segments-and-campaigns)

The Audience Targeting app includes a simulator feature. The Audience Targeting
Simulator allows administrators to preview the way portal pages appear to
different users. It does so by allowing site administrators to modify the
matched user segments or campaigns. The Audience Targeting Simulator is
accessible via the Dockbar. The Simulator icon appears below the Add, Preview,
and Edit icons but above the Edit Controls icon on the left side of the Dockbar.
Clicking on the Simulator icon opens a panel which has two tabs: *User Segments*
and *Campaigns*. By default, the Audience Targeting Simulator is only visible to
site administrators and users with the View permission for the Audience Targeting
Simulator.

+$$$

**Note:** Permissions pertaining to the Audience Targeting Simulator and other
features of the Audience Targeting app can be granted via the *Actions* &rarr;
*Define Permissions* menu of the Roles section in the Control Panel. When
defining permissions for a role, go to *Site Administration* &rarr;
*Configuration* to find the *Audience Targeting*, *Audience Targeting
Resources*, and *Audience Targeting Simulator* sections.

$$$

The User Segments tab of the Audience Targeting simulator displays a list of all
the user segments matched by the current user as well as all the user segments
not matched by the current user. Any matched user segment can be unselected and
any unmatched user segment can be selected. This allows site administrators to
simulate how the website would appear to different users. Clicking on the
*Simulate* button makes your website appear to you the way it would appear to
the selected user segments. The simulation continues until you click the *Stop
Simulation* button. This allows site administrators to navigate around their
site as if they were a user that matched the selected user segments.

![Figure 7.11: Audience Targeting Simulator](../../images/07-audience-targeting-simulator.png)

The Campaigns tab of the Content Targeting Simulator displays all matched
campaigns and all unmatched campaigns. It does not offer a *Simulate* option
yet. However, since campaigns target specific user segments, it's easy to
simulate how your site would look if certain campaigns were matched.

